[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: C..
[Amit Varma]: I.V.
[Amit Varma]: I.
[Amit Varma]: To
[Amit Varma]: work, his relationship status would undoubtedly read, it's complicated.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. Sadanand Dhoomey is an old friend of mine and a columnist
[Amit Varma]: I've always enjoyed reading. And when I saw on social media that he happened to be in
[Amit Varma]: India, I wrote to him to ask if he'd be passing through Mumbai and would like to be a guest
[Amit Varma]: on my podcast. Well, we are recording this on Sunday, May 26. And it turned out that
[Amit Varma]: he was passing through Mumbai today, one flight landed here at 535 in the evening, and another
[Amit Varma]: takes off in a few hours time, giving him a narrow window in which he said he'd be happy
[Amit Varma]: to record with me. So my partners at IBM and I planned a crafty operation. We opened up
[Amit Varma]: a studio even though it was a Sunday. And the plan was that I would head on over to
[Amit Varma]: the airport with my producer Abbas, we'd pick up Sadanand to save the time of his getting
[Amit Varma]: an Uber etc. And we would speak to the studio. Now if an action film is ever made on my life,
[Amit Varma]: let me tell you that the car chase scene is all figured out. No one was chasing us today.
[Amit Varma]: But we were racing against time. And no one races in Mumbai better than me. I'm the greatest
[Amit Varma]: driver in the history of Mumbai. And I overtook a plane that was about to take off, hit the
[Amit Varma]: highway, change lanes furiously, took unknown shortcuts and bypasses that even locals don't
[Amit Varma]: know about, and got to the studio in record time. We even encountered a cow in the middle
[Amit Varma]: of the road. And to avoid the cow I was going at 100 miles an hour, I used a nearby handcart
[Amit Varma]: as a ramp to take my car up in the air and over the cow, determined that Sadanand, Abbas
[Amit Varma]: and I may expire, but the cow should not perspire. We received the good karma for our action
[Amit Varma]: immediately and survive the landing. And here we are now luxuriating in the elite air conditioning
[Amit Varma]: of the finest recording studio known to humankind. Before we begin our conversation, though,
[Amit Varma]: I think we need a break to catch our breath.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to recommend one book a week that I love. The book I want to recommend today
[Amit Varma]: is Enlightenment Now by Steven Pinker. Steven was also a guest on my show in episode 99.
[Amit Varma]: And the book we spoke about in that episode is Enlightenment Now. And remember,
[Amit Varma]: you get a 30 day free trial only at Storytel.com slash IVM.
[Amit Varma]: Sadanand, welcome to the scene in the unseen. Good to be here, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Now that you've got here safely. Before we start talking about the 2019 elections,
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit more about yourself. Like, you know, all my listeners presumably know that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you work at the American Enterprise Institute, you write columns for the Wall
[Amit Varma]: Street Journal. But how did you get here? What sort of your journey and who were your formative
[Guest]: intellectual influences? So, you know, I wear a couple of hats. My main hat is at the American
[Guest]: Enterprise Institute, as you said, where I'm the South Asia scholar, I cover this part of the world,
[Guest]: I look at politics, I look at economic policy, foreign policy. And then I also wear two hats
[Guest]: as a columnist. I've had a column with the Wall Street Journal now since 2010. That is twice a
[Guest]: month and twice a month I look at, I try to keep it news based. So I focus on what I think is the
[Guest]: most important thing that's happened in this part of the world over the past two weeks. And then
[Guest]: every four weeks, I also write a column for the Times of India. And that tends to be focused much
[Guest]: more on domestic Indian politics. So it's kind of, you know, it's a bit of a paradox. I started out
[Guest]: as a journalist. So now I'm not sort of I'm still kind of a journalist, though. I'm on the opinion
[Guest]: side, not on the news side. I started out as a journalist working for a magazine called the
[Guest]: Far Eastern Economic Review, which doesn't exist anymore, sadly. And the story really begins
[Guest]: quite by accident, you know, I might maybe one of the few columnists out there who owes his career
[Guest]: to nuclear test. Because in 1998, I was in Princeton, I was studying public policy. And
[Guest]: we had an internship program that essentially allowed us to go anywhere and Princeton would
[Guest]: pick up the bill. And I chose but this is between my first year and the second year of my MPA. And
[Guest]: I chose to come to Delhi. And I started out working for spending my time at a TV channel,
[Guest]: but the TV channel I was at was going through really bad times. And so I found that really,
[Guest]: I had nothing to do, they had one camera, they had they were just sort of in some kind of crisis. And
[Guest]: so I was twiddling my thumbs. And it just so happened that I knew someone who worked for
[Guest]: this magazine called the Far Eastern Economic Review. And I said, Well, you know, why don't
[Guest]: we meet up for coffee, I didn't have anything in mind, it was just like just to meet someone.
[Guest]: Turns out that this person who was the bureau chief in India, had planned a long vacation to
[Guest]: France, had sort of a two and a half month vacation planned, and wrote to the editors and said that,
[Guest]: Look, you know, I've got this guy who's an intern, he's a grad student at Princeton,
[Guest]: it's just good to have somebody around in the office while I'm away in France.
[Guest]: That was the summer that India tested nuclear weapons. And I was in the office. And it turned
[Guest]: out that the Far Eastern Economic Review was got the first interview with Strobe Talbot,
[Guest]: who was then the Deputy Secretary of State, and leading the Clinton administration's
[Guest]: talks with the Indian government. And so I was sitting in the office and I sent
[Guest]: honest, but carefully crafted facts to just one Singh's office, where I said factually,
[Guest]: that I worked with the Far Eastern Economic, I was writing for the Far Eastern Economic Review,
[Guest]: I was visiting from the United States. And our magazine had just done an interview with Strobe
[Guest]: Talbot. And would he be interested in telling us about the Indian side of the story. And at this
[Guest]: point, just one thing had not spoken to anyone. And so I walk into his office, and I'm wearing
[Guest]: these sandals. And I walk in and he sort of looks at me and I look way too young to be the person he
[Guest]: was be talking to. And he said, Well, you know, tell me about yourself. What are you doing over
[Guest]: here? And I told her actually, I'm the intern, I'm just visiting from Princeton. But to his credit,
[Guest]: he didn't turn me out. He sat down, he did the interview. It was a bit of a scoop at the time.
[Guest]: And then from there, I just spent, you know, the next several weeks churning out stories,
[Guest]: because I mean, this is sort of heaven for me. I mean, I would have paid them to be
[Guest]: doing what I was doing. And I went back to Princeton after that. And when it was time to
[Guest]: when it was time to graduate, someone had from a magazine had sort of made me an offer. And I
[Guest]: wrote to the editors of the review asking for a recommendation, because I'd spent the summer there.
[Guest]: And instead, I was given a job offer. And I became the India bureau chief of the Far Eastern
[Guest]: Economic Review, a year after I'd been the intern, did that for a bit. And in those days,
[Guest]: it kind of tells you how, you know, time how Asia has changed. But in those days, for us,
[Guest]: Southeast Asia was much, much more important than India. It was just a bigger story. And so
[Guest]: I was cranking out stories, I had a story, sometimes two stories every week, it was a
[Guest]: weekly magazine. And my editors in Hong Kong said that, you know, you're incredibly productive.
[Guest]: And we don't want to waste you in India, because really, who cares about the India story?
[Guest]: Where we, you know, why don't we send you to someplace in Southeast Asia? Or where would
[Guest]: you like to go? And I picked Indonesia, because for two reasons. One, I'd lived there as a child.
[Guest]: And secondly, as an Indian, I had a bit of this big country bias. So you know, it's just sort of
[Guest]: hard for me to get extremely enthusiastic about Malaysia or Thailand or any of the whereas
[Guest]: Indonesia was a serious country, more than 200 million people and so on. So I ended up in
[Guest]: Indonesia for four years. I was there during the Bali bombings of 2002. And I ended up writing a
[Guest]: book about the rise of radical Islam in Indonesia. And then for a while I was after the book,
[Guest]: I was just freelancing, doing my own thing. And again, just by accident, I wrote something in
[Guest]: the Wall Street Journal, I happened to be in New York, the day that Faisal Shahzad tried to blow
[Guest]: up Times Square, and it didn't didn't work out. And I wrote a piece the next day, about how,
[Guest]: you know, the reason why historical reasons, Pakistan, this is then not, it's no longer true
[Guest]: today, Pakistan produced such a large proportion of the world's jihadists. And this ended up being
[Guest]: blogged about on AEI's website. One thing led to the other, I went there for lunch just to meet
[Guest]: some people I didn't again, didn't have any idea that there was a job in the works. And by the end
[Guest]: of the lunch, I was offered a position as their South Asia scholar. And so that's sort of been the
[Guest]: I mean, it's been a series of accidents. I still sort of think of myself in many ways as a reporter.
[Guest]: And in many ways, Columbia Journalism School was as important to me as formative to me as
[Guest]: Princeton and public policy. And Princeton and the public policy school was, you know, all about
[Guest]: getting a grounding in macroeconomics and microeconomics and international relations
[Guest]: and so on, you know, standard neoliberal dogma. But the journalism school was really about,
[Guest]: you know, that was in some ways, that was a very artisanal, it was about craft.
[Guest]: And I cared a lot about that. And at the time, when I went to journalism school,
[Guest]: that's what I was really interested in. And if I hadn't gone to policy school,
[Guest]: I would probably have gone to an MFA, and I would have done a writing class. So I wasn't sort of I
[Guest]: didn't start out necessarily with a, with a wonkish bent, but then just sort of one thing
[Guest]: led to the other. And, and that's how it is. In fact, we first met when your book,
[Amit Varma]: My Friend the Fanatic launched in India. If you remember, we have, you know, I did the Bombay
[Amit Varma]: launch. Absolutely. We had a panel discussion about it panel as in me interviewing you. So
[Amit Varma]: this is like a revisitation. And that was what 2010 now, something like that ages ago. Yeah,
[Amit Varma]: maybe in 2009, even. So what were kind of your, you know, through this period,
[Amit Varma]: you went to both Columbia did journalism, you did public policy in Princeton, what were like
[Amit Varma]: your formative intellectual influences? Like, have you changed along the way?
[Amit Varma]: If I like one question I ask a lot of my guests is, can you name a book or maybe multiple books
[Amit Varma]: that changed the way you think about the world? And would it be easy for you to pinpoint that?
[Guest]: Actually, wouldn't be maybe it's been because I've been spending too much time in TV studios
[Guest]: right now. It wouldn't be easy for me to pinpoint, you know, one or two books in particular,
[Guest]: I would say that in many ways, my you know, what was formative to me was more than anything else,
[Guest]: my work as a journalist. And I found the Indonesia experience was extremely important for me.
[Guest]: Because I had, you know, like many Indians who had studied in the United States,
[Guest]: I had not been surprised by the disparity in wealth and development. That's what you expect
[Guest]: when you go from Delhi to New York. And that was very normal. And it was only when I moved to
[Guest]: Indonesia, which was also a developing country. And I saw just how much better Indonesia had done.
[Guest]: We're talking about the late 1990s. In fact, I landed in Indonesia in 2000. You sort of realize
[Guest]: that even though Indonesia was in the midst of the financial crisis, right, it still hadn't
[Guest]: recovered from the 1997 Asian financial crisis, three years later, it had done so much better by
[Guest]: its people. And so a lot of the sort of a lot of my reading was, you know, around the East Asian
[Guest]: miracle, around development, a lot about politics in Southeast Asia, politics in, in Indonesia,
[Guest]: in particular. So all of that was sort of part of it, I wouldn't say, you know, any one particular
[Guest]: writer from that period sort of stands out for me. But certainly in terms of my experience,
[Guest]: the travel, and the experience of living in another country and culture, immersing myself in it,
[Guest]: and really having to report on it from day one, right, which is what you do as a journalist,
[Guest]: you're just thrown into the deep end and you're sort of start making sense of this. That was
[Amit Varma]: extremely influential for me. And what did you learn from your experiences there about what we
[Amit Varma]: were doing wrong? Like what were they doing? Right? What were we doing wrong? What were the sort of
[Guest]: the directions in which we needed to go? So if you think about it, Suharto and Indira Gandhi
[Guest]: were almost exact contemporaries. Indira Gandhi took power in 1966. And Suharto, after the bloody
[Guest]: killings of the communists in Indonesia, basically took power at the same time. And the difference is
[Guest]: that Indira Gandhi doubled down on state planning, socialism, in fact, she deepened some of the
[Guest]: errors that we had already made in the early years after independence, whereas Suharto,
[Guest]: with the Americans holding his hand, brought in some economists from Berkeley, very similar to
[Guest]: the Chilean story, right? You had the Chicago boys in Chile, you had the Berkeley gang in Indonesia,
[Guest]: and allowed the market to play a greater role in the economy, rationalized economic decision making,
[Guest]: allowed the private sector to flourish. And as a result, Indonesia really began to pull away. And
[Guest]: even today, you know, so many years after we started our reform program here in India,
[Guest]: the Indonesians still remain, you know, it remains a country, which is the higher per capita income,
[Guest]: higher human development indicators, and so on. And it's not as though the Indonesian reform
[Guest]: story has been perfect. In many ways, it's been, it's had its share of flaws. But the central
[Guest]: difference between Indonesia and India was that by the 1970s, the Indonesians had decided to trust
[Guest]: at least to a degree, the invisible hand of the market, whereas through the 1970s,
[Guest]: India was still trusting the heavy hand of the state.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And how relevant does this then become, for example, to how one looks at Narendra Modi,
[Amit Varma]: for example, who we are discussing today, in the sense that there is one narrative arc, which talks
[Amit Varma]: about the rise of Hindutva, right from the Jansangh onwards, and you know, the BJP getting
[Amit Varma]: four seats in 1984, then the whole Ayodhya thing happening and being the impetus for their growth,
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. But at the same time, a lot of people also turned to the BJP, hopefully,
[Amit Varma]: because they were so disheartened by the heavy hand of the state, which despite the partial
[Amit Varma]: liberalization of 91, the Congress still seemed to believe in, and in many ways, watch by as Prime
[Amit Varma]: Minister did carry out a bunch of reforms and hold out hope that India could move further in
[Amit Varma]: the direction. And was that also then a parallel impetus behind the support that Modi got from a
[Guest]: lot of people despite the riots of 2002? I'm not sure if I'd say it's a lot, right? I mean,
[Guest]: I would divide this, you know, between sort of elite opinion makers, people writing in the pink
[Guest]: pages, and your average guy on the street. And at some level, that development story or the hope of
[Guest]: development story does intersect. But it was only a handful of commentators, who essentially took
[Guest]: the call on Modi and said, here is the person who is most likely to pick up the mantle of the
[Guest]: Vajpayee era reforms. We'd seen them languish for 10 years under Manmohan Singh, despite Manmohan
[Guest]: Singh's own credentials, as the finance minister who kickstarted liberalization in 1991. And so we
[Guest]: had, you know, obviously, you know, we've talked about this before, you know, there was a schism
[Guest]: among those of us who have long argued for a greater role for the market in the Indian economy.
[Guest]: And some people felt that because of 2002, and because of the baggage that Modi carried,
[Guest]: he should never be allowed to should never be supported for the top job. That was, in fact,
[Guest]: my position also until around the middle of 2013, when he became the party nominee. Once I sort of
[Guest]: saw it mentally as a primary process, he was not the person I would have liked to see win that
[Guest]: primary, though, I did think that his stewardship of Gujarat did give him a claim to perhaps have
[Guest]: an outside influence, outside influence in running the economy. After 2013, when he became the
[Guest]: candidate, I thought that this was the best bet. He was the best bet for, for reform. Now, that
[Guest]: was a sort of conversation that was being had, as I said, on the op ed pages and in television
[Guest]: studios, and so on. On the ground, it was obviously not a converse, this was not this kind of
[Guest]: conversation, right? I mean, I remember I was in Varanasi for his election in 2014. And I went to
[Guest]: an English teaching class. And these were just, you know, mostly young people, obviously people
[Guest]: who did not speak English, as a first language, they were trying to learn English as adults.
[Guest]: And I asked the teacher was very kind, he sort of let me just chat with the students. And I asked
[Guest]: them, so these are people not necessarily, so they'd be from the age group would be, you know,
[Guest]: roughly from 18 to 28. So many of them were working people who are then coming in to sort
[Guest]: of improve their English. And I asked them who they would vote for. And the overwhelming majority
[Guest]: picked Modi. Oddly enough, a few of them picked Aam Aadmi Party, which seems so quaint now,
[Unknown]: five years later, but most of them picked Modi. And the reasons were very sort of basic. It was
[Guest]: like, someone said that he had a brother who worked in Gujarat, and he had gone to visit his
[Guest]: brother and he found that in Gujarat, they didn't have power cuts, but they had power cuts in UP.
[Guest]: Someone else had, you know, showed me a photo, it turned out to be some precursor to the fake
[Guest]: news flood, we'd seen it turned out to be a photo from China, but it was, look, this is some bus
[Guest]: stop that Modi ji has created in Gujarat. But it was sort of very, very concrete reasons, right?
[Guest]: So people just had a sense that India things are not moving. And it's certainly true that you know,
[Guest]: the pundits, we may have fed that on the periphery. But I don't think that elite level conversation
[Guest]: that wonkish conversation to had was the same conversation that the masses were having.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And there was a recent caravan story on you and a bunch of others who, you know,
[Amit Varma]: criticizing you guys for supporting Modi in 2014. And then changing your minds as if changing your
[Amit Varma]: mind is a bad thing when the facts change. And the way I look at it is that, in some senses,
[Amit Varma]: that kind of judgment comes from the tyranny of history in the sense that whatever has happened
[Amit Varma]: in the past seems inevitable after it happens. But in 2014, it would certainly not have been
[Amit Varma]: inevitable that it will necessarily pan out this way. And I think the bet that a lot of people made
[Amit Varma]: was that he can either carry on consolidating his power and actually follow through on some of his
[Amit Varma]: development rhetoric, and leave the Hindutva behind, which for a lot of the time he had done
[Amit Varma]: he had done in Gujarat, where he sidelined the RSS guys like Gurdan Tafadia, sidelined the VHP
[Amit Varma]: and so on. Or he could ignore the development and go for Hindutva. And of course, as we know,
[Amit Varma]: what has happened is that economically, the last five years have been pretty much a disaster and
[Amit Varma]: society is more polarized than ever. And it's gone in that way, but it need not have gone in that
[Amit Varma]: way. And with the benefit of hindsight to now sort of look back and say that, oh, you should
[Guest]: have known this all along, I think is somewhat unfair. Yeah, I think it's perfectly okay for
[Guest]: the caravan or indeed for anybody to, you know, criticize me or anybody else, because, you know,
[Guest]: we're in the public square, we should be criticized, we should be scrutinized.
[Guest]: Part of the problem I have, though, with the way this is was framed, is that, you know, a section
[Guest]: of of the left is pretty similar in terms of how they view these things. It's quite similar to the
[Guest]: right, I mean, except that they have, you know, better spelling and punctuation. And, you know,
[Guest]: it reminds me of something that, you know, E.M. Forster once had this, you know, he divided
[Guest]: characters in a novel into two types of characters, flats and rounds. And a flat character is a
[Guest]: character who is essentially the same on page one, and the same on page 300. And a round character
[Guest]: is a character who evolves over the arc of the novel. And I think the problem with people on
[Guest]: both ends of the spectrum is that they view Modi as a flat character. Whereas I think that any
[Guest]: serious politician must be viewed as a round character. It's not as though you change your
[Guest]: judgment every week. It's not as though you change your judgment every month. But you are aware of
[Guest]: what they are saying and doing, and your assessment changes as they evolve, right? Bill Clinton as
[Guest]: governor of Arkansas is not the same as Bill Clinton as president. And I think it was, you
[Guest]: could certainly, it's fair to criticize me, and it's a criticism that I accept. If you say that,
[Guest]: look, you called it wrong. You thought that this guy would do certain things, and he didn't do it,
[Guest]: and you were wrong. And I will accept that. And I will say, you know what, you are right.
[Guest]: But I don't think it's fair to criticize someone for changing their views when the facts changed.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And this is something I've, you know, I chatted about this with Ram Guha. I did a couple
[Amit Varma]: of episodes on Gandhi with him. And we spoke about how people contain multitude. So it's very easy
[Amit Varma]: to judge Gandhi for being A, B, or C, but people always contain multitudes. And it's similar in a
[Amit Varma]: sense to Vajpayee that when, you know, he passed away, all the judgments of him was, a lot of the
[Amit Varma]: judgments of him were as an essentially flat character, either he's the best Prime Minister
[Amit Varma]: we had, or he's a bigoted demagogue who, you know, brought this upon us. And they're not necessarily
[Amit Varma]: true. But I'm curious, when you speak of the evolution of Modi per se, would you say he really
[Amit Varma]: evolved after 2014? And if so, what made him evolve? Or was it the case that the master as he
[Amit Varma]: is at optics, in 2014, all he did was successfully appear all things to all people, allowing people
[Amit Varma]: who wanted economic reforms to believe that he was a development guy, when actually, of course,
[Amit Varma]: he wasn't. And that was him all along, or did he actually evolve? And then if he evolved away from
[Amit Varma]: that development direction towards this polarizing, I nominate Sadhvi Pragya to the Lok Sabha kind of
[Amit Varma]: direction, what would have brought about this evolution?
[Guest]: I mean, to a certain extent, it's true that, you know, he was all things to all people. But that's
[Guest]: really not unusual in politics, right? I think successful politicians are often many different
[Guest]: things to many different people. So that's not something that I hold against him. I would say
[Guest]: there is there was an evolution, you would say that, you know, from about 2002 to 2007,
[Guest]: he was positioned and he positioned himself, really, as the Hindu strongman of Gujarat,
[Guest]: right in the in the aftermath of the riots. From around 2017 to 2014. He tried to position himself
[Guest]: as Mr. Development, we can get into the Gujarat model, but I don't think it was all optics,
[Guest]: right? It's certainly true. And I spoke with many, many businessmen at that time, both
[Guest]: foreign businessmen and domestic businessmen. And they genuinely praised they genuinely taught the
[Guest]: world of him, they would tell me about how much how easy it was to do business in Gujarat,
[Guest]: how well organized it was, the infrastructure, the problem solving that was centralized,
[Guest]: but there was problem solving. The vibrant Gujarat summits did, did attract a fair amount
[Guest]: of attention. He did say things that in hindsight, he didn't follow through on.
[Guest]: But he said things like, you know, minimum government, maximum governance,
[Guest]: the government has no business doing business, we're going to replace red tape with the red
[Guest]: carpet. He even sort of tweeted out something when Margaret Thatcher died. So you know,
[Guest]: so certainly in hindsight, it's, it's, it's fair to say that, you know, maybe some of us because
[Guest]: we were, we wanted that change, so desperately, we were then willing to connect the dots in a way
[Guest]: that convinced us or what we saw what we wanted to believe, and that he was clever enough to put
[Guest]: some of that out there. But on the other hand, you know, you look back on that campaign, the truth
[Guest]: is that it was focused on development. There was very little Hindutva in that campaign. The way he
[Guest]: presented himself really was he would go into places, he would talk about jobs, he would talk
[Guest]: about electricity, he would talk about inflation, he would also talk about a strong nation and
[Guest]: standing up to Pakistan and China and so on. But I do think that, you know, it's one thing to
[Guest]: look back in 2019. And say that, well, things did not pan out, as some of us had hoped. But
[Guest]: that doesn't mean that the bet in 2014 was irrational or unjustified. The bet in 2014
[Guest]: did have, there were things that were that were going for him.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly. I mean, I sort of, I had an episode with Salman Sos recently, where he says the exact
[Amit Varma]: same thing about 2014, that if you actually look at the BJP manifesto, he's a Congress spokesman,
[Amit Varma]: but he said that he found a lot of things about the manifesto, which he liked and was hopeful that
[Amit Varma]: Modi would carry those promises around. And I also had an episode a few months ago, which will be
[Amit Varma]: linked from the show notes with Prashant Jha, who wrote the book How the BJP Wins, where he speaks
[Amit Varma]: about how Modi was a master of the narrative in terms of being able to simultaneously project
[Amit Varma]: himself as one Hindu Hriday Samrat, and two, the development guy, and three, the Garibo Ka Friend
[Amit Varma]: guy. And that all of these were simultaneous and working across different levels. And what you said
[Amit Varma]: about how it is now obvious that, you know, that Modi didn't carry out and all of this and people
[Amit Varma]: who said Modi would carry out these particular promises were wrong. And it's true that they were
[Amit Varma]: wrong, but the bet wasn't necessarily wrong. And this is like, you know, I was a professional poker
[Amit Varma]: player for five years, and I keep talking about the importance in everything of probabilistic
[Amit Varma]: thinking. After something happens, it has either happened 100% or at 0%. But before it happens,
[Amit Varma]: there are always percentages. And if you bet on something that is, say, 60% to happen,
[Amit Varma]: your bet is correct. But it doesn't mean that if it doesn't happen, that, you know, you were
[Amit Varma]: drastically wrong and the bet was wrong. And in that sense, even though I myself didn't support
[Amit Varma]: Modi at any point, but I could understand why the support I mean, I could understand the rationale
[Amit Varma]: which went behind supporting him in 2014. How did a lot of the people who supported him? How did you
[Amit Varma]: in fact, then reconcile 2002 with that? Like, was it a sense of Oh, innocent until proven guilty?
[Amit Varma]: And maybe he was just incompetent rather than an actual colluder in the riots? Or was it a sense
[Guest]: of even if it happened, it's okay. I struggled with that a lot. And in fact, when I first started
[Guest]: writing about him, and one of my first columns for the Wall Street Journal, in 2010, was titled
[Guest]: Prime Minister Modi won't fly. And it was essentially about how he had done a pretty good
[Guest]: job running Gujarat, how he was the most business friendly politician in India. But the taint of
[Guest]: the 2002 riots essentially disqualified him from the prime ministership. And then I wrote a cover
[Guest]: story for the foreign policy website, after he was reelected Chief Minister of Gujarat for the
[Guest]: third time in 2012, were essentially expanded upon that same argument. So it certainly wasn't
[Guest]: easy for me. In the end, it was more a case of was absolutely a case of Well,
[Guest]: this is a terrible episode. However, since then, there has been no further violence in Gujarat.
[Guest]: Since then, he has distanced himself from and in fact, earned the enmity of the likes of Praveen
[Guest]: Togadia. The VHP guys were actually campaigning against him in 2012.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, he kicked out Gurdansir Dadao Feo Zafaria from the cabinet.
[Guest]: Dadao Feo Zafaria from the cabinet. So he had, you know, gone some distance to distance himself from
[Guest]: some of these scummy elements. The SIT, what they call the clean chit did sort of also make a
[Guest]: difference. You know, in the end, do you believe in rule of law? If you believe in rule of law,
[Guest]: you've got to sort of, you know, this has been investigation. It was an investigation
[Guest]: ordered by the Supreme Court. This was not a Gujarat government investigation.
[Guest]: And so there were a lot of things which allowed you if you sort of added it all up to say that,
[Guest]: well, look, this is awful. And ideally, you would not want a prime minister who
[Guest]: had any association with something like that. However, under the circumstances,
[Guest]: it comes down to him, or a third term for Congress, which has not only failed miserably
[Guest]: failed miserably on the economic front, but it has also run probably the most corrupt government
[Guest]: in Indian history. And what does that say about Indian democracy? If you're giving these guys
[Guest]: a third term, those were the choices, they were flawed choices. And I think under those circumstances,
[Guest]: to me, it was the superior choice.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, as another friend of mine who supported the BJP at that time quite actively and later
[Amit Varma]: changed his mind, Rajesh Jain did a long two hour episode with me on the scene and the unseen,
[Amit Varma]: which I recommend everyone listen to, that will be in the show notes. And the way he put it was
[Amit Varma]: he supported them because they were the lighter shade of grey. And I mean, with hindsight, of
[Amit Varma]: course, you can look back and say, hey, no way. But you know, at the time, I think that's reasonable
[Amit Varma]: enough. So tell me, you know, looking back through, say, the last five years, before we get
[Amit Varma]: to these elections, looking back through the last five years, at around what point did you begin to
[Amit Varma]: feel that, wait a minute, you know, this guy is not going to do any of the development stuff.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, you know, there are lynchings happening. And all of this is so you know,
[Guest]: I was hopeful, obviously, when he came into office, my journal column, the week he was elected,
[Guest]: was essentially said India votes for hope, which I believe was definitely the case,
[Guest]: which is, I mean, true, regardless of how it turned out. Exactly. Now, I became critical right
[Guest]: away. I criticized the first budget because it was the interim budget, because it was just,
[Guest]: there was such a huge opportunity, right? Get rid of this retroactive tax. There was so much
[Guest]: he could have done to just dominate the headlines in the financial press. And they dropped the ball
[Guest]: right away. So I was critical right away. And in terms of the interim budget in terms of the first
[Guest]: budget, because already, you could sort of see that they were not doing many of the things that
[Guest]: I had hoped that they would do. Similarly, I was critical right away, when Akhlaq happened. And
[Guest]: again, that was frankly, such a gimme. All he had to do was step up and say the right thing.
[Guest]: It was the easiest thing to do in the world. This is a guy whose own brother was in the Air Force,
[Guest]: right? I mean, all basic humanity just demanded that you say something, embrace the family,
[Guest]: and he dropped the ball. But those criticisms were episodic. So it was like, well, you have not done
[Guest]: this, and you ought to do it. For me, there were two things that really began to fundamentally
[Guest]: change how I viewed this government. And on the economic front, it was demonetization,
[Guest]: which is, of course, no surprise. And it's the case for many people. Demonetization,
[Guest]: the just the sheer stupidity of it, the sheer callousness of it, the opacity of the decision
[Guest]: making, I mean, at every level, right? This is really, you know, I use, I describe demonetization
[Unknown]: as too crazy for Venezuela. They consider it and said, No, wait a minute, if you've got a policy
[Guest]: that's too crazy for Venezuela, you're in trouble. So on the economic front, it was really, it was
[Guest]: demonetization that, you know, was the straw that broke the camel's back. And on the cultural side,
[Guest]: it was the appointment of Yogi Adityanath. Because at some point, you just have to say,
[Guest]: look, where is this train headed? And the way where this train is headed is not where I want
[Guest]: to go. So I have to get off. And I remember having conversations with many of my friends who were
[Guest]: very close to the government, and in fact, remain close to the government. And and I said, look,
[Guest]: where are the brakes on this thing? And I never got a satisfactory answer. And I still don't have
[Amit Varma]: a satisfactory answer. Yeah, in fact, I mean, I was equally aghast by demon, I was writing about
[Amit Varma]: it from the week it came out, I've had multiple episodes on it, it is essentially the largest
[Amit Varma]: assault on property rights in human history, as I see it. You know, I compared Modi to Mao at that
[Amit Varma]: time, in fact, in the Times of India, and got a lot of flack for that. But you know, going back
[Amit Varma]: to what you said earlier about say, Akhlaq's killing, and at that point, Modi could so easily
[Amit Varma]: have just put out a two sentence statement, and that would have kind of covered his ass, but he
[Amit Varma]: didn't even do that. He stayed silent. And what we've seen is that all through most of this period,
[Amit Varma]: the cow lynchings and the stuff that's been happening. I mean, he's occasionally come out
[Amit Varma]: and said a couple of things, but mostly he's been silent. What do you think the incentives on him
[Amit Varma]: are? Like, how much of the control does the RSS have on the BJP and Modi? How much is Modi himself
[Amit Varma]: a true believer in Hindutva? Because with you know, with every politician, there's always sort
[Amit Varma]: of a trade off between what you really believe in, and your will to power, what you know, kind
[Amit Varma]: of gets you there in the first place. And my sort of take of Modi once upon a time was that look,
[Amit Varma]: he's a sociopath, he'll do anything to come to power, he doesn't necessarily have any beliefs
[Amit Varma]: of his own. He'll just do whatever gets him in power. And yet, through all this point, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if he stays silent through all of this, if he nominates Pragya Thakur as an MP, as he did
[Amit Varma]: recently, then you've really got to wonder that either the pressures on him from the RSS are huge,
[Guest]: or he's actually a Hindutva believer. You know, I don't have a good answer to that. And in a way,
[Guest]: it almost doesn't matter. I actually don't really care what Modi thinks at three in the morning.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's irrelevant. I judge him by what he says, and what he does as Prime Minister.
[Guest]: And whether at three in the morning, tossing in his bed, he is actually appalled by his own silence,
[Guest]: or whether he is secretly exultant, is kind of irrelevant. That was just, you know,
[Guest]: that moment stood out for me, partly because of, you know, the story there, the family story over
[Guest]: there. The simplest thing to do would be to put out a statement, and then frankly, to invite the
[Guest]: brother who was a mechanic in the Air Force, invite him to the Prime Minister's residence,
[Guest]: and just reach out and show that you don't put religion above humanity. You don't put,
[Guest]: you know, religious sentiments above basic humanity. So he dropped the ball on that. The
[Guest]: way it's been explained to me is that, you know, there is a certain percentage of this population,
[Guest]: I mean, this classic base politics, you have a certain amount of the base, which would be upset
[Guest]: if he'd done that. And he wasn't willing to take on that. I mean, what's interesting is that
[Guest]: if you look at Modi's own statements over these last five years, not counting some of the stuff
[Guest]: he said in the campaign, by and large, he said the sort of things that world leaders say,
[Guest]: he's gone and addressed conferences and said that Islam is a religion of peace, he's sort of,
[Guest]: you know, made the right noises when he goes to the Middle East, and so on, and Abu Dhabi and
[Guest]: places like that. So it's not as though most of his rhetoric, not counting the campaign,
[Guest]: and we can get to that, most of his own rhetoric has been reasonable as Prime Minister.
[Guest]: The problem arises in his first of all, the silences, and those silences cannot be wished
[Guest]: away. And secondly, in the kinds of people he has empowered. And as long as if you really wanted to
[Guest]: give him the benefit of the doubt, which I did, as long as you had, you know, the likes of Yogi
[Guest]: Adityanath and Giriraj Singh and some of these other people, as part of the coalition, but very
[Guest]: clearly kept at a distance and not people in power. That was something that I was willing to live
[Guest]: with, right? I mean, you have, this is true of conservative movements everywhere that you're
[Guest]: going to have some people who are not very responsible, not very likable. But as long as
[Guest]: the responsible elements are in charge, you live with that. The problem arises when you start
[Guest]: mainstreaming those people, right? And when you take someone whose main claim to fame is his
[Guest]: violent, inflammatory, anti-Muslim rhetoric, and you put him in charge of India's largest state,
[Guest]: what are you saying? What's the signal you're sending to the next generation of BJP leaders?
[Guest]: You're saying that this is the fast track to a brilliant political career. You do this,
[Guest]: and you get to be the second youngest chief minister in the history of Uttar Pradesh.
[Guest]: And so there was just absolutely no way to explain that. And I still look back on these
[Guest]: five years, and I think that he could have just done a few things differently. Because if you
[Guest]: look at most of his chief ministerial picks, they're pretty centrist figures from within the
[Guest]: BJP. If you look at most of his senior ministers, these are people who choose their words carefully.
[Guest]: Sushma Swaraj, Rajnath Singh, Gadkari, Jaitley, these are not people who are shooting their mouth
[Guest]: off and talking about, you know, if you kill one of mine, I'll kill 100 of yours or standing,
[Guest]: sitting on stage while someone is talking about digging up corpses. I mean, they don't,
[Guest]: they're just they're very far away from that. And I think that this is where Modi's BJP
[Guest]: really lost the plot.
[Amit Varma]: And I think, you know, for me, in fact, Adityanath being made chief minister was
[Amit Varma]: also a sort of a very revelatory moment. I wrote a column at the time arguing that this was
[Amit Varma]: sort of society striking back at the elite. So let me ask you a question. I've asked Shashi
[Amit Varma]: Tharoor on the show, I asked Aakar Patel, we did a long episode on Hindutva. And I'll come back to
[Amit Varma]: that later. And I asked him as well. And it's something that still bothers me, which is this,
[Amit Varma]: that our elites drafted a liberal constitution, not liberal enough for me in terms of protecting
[Amit Varma]: individual rights, but by and large, liberal. Our elites drafted a liberal constitution,
[Amit Varma]: and imposed it top down upon a country that you could argue was really an illiberal society.
[Amit Varma]: And the question then arises, that how is that imposition of a liberal constitution
[Amit Varma]: on an illiberal society? Is that itself not an illiberal act? And if society then decides to
[Amit Varma]: strike back and say that no, we are illiberal, we like our illiberalism to hell with what you
[Amit Varma]: elites try to impose on us? How are we to sort of answer that? And this, by the way, was a point that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, even in different language, and I found out later after I'd made it, a point that even
[Amit Varma]: Dindayal Upadhyay, who is one of Modi's heroes, had himself made in his time?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think it's a tough question. Because the people who have drafted the constitution
[Guest]: were not remotely representative of India. Right? If you just sort of look at their profiles,
[Guest]: look at their level of education, look at their, look at their wealth, look at their exposure to
[Guest]: Western learning, start with Ambedkar with his PhD from Columbia, this was clearly
[Guest]: unrepresentative of India. And that perhaps if you'd had a referendum in the aftermath of
[Guest]: partition, and of what kind of state you wanted to be, maybe the majority would indeed have voted
[Guest]: for some kind of Hindu Rashtra. And so I think that's a fair point. But I think at the same time,
[Guest]: if you happen to believe in certain ideas, because you think that those are the superior
[Guest]: ideas, and they are, they offer you a better way of ordering society and ordering government,
[Guest]: then you'd still stand by it, because it's a value judgment, you think that
[Guest]: those liberal ideas are better ideas, and they're worth fighting for.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, my position on that simply is that if we want a liberal society, then we get to that
[Amit Varma]: liberal society through the culture, we change the culture, it has to happen bottoms up,
[Amit Varma]: it can't happen top down. And in a sense, the fact that Adityanath is the chief minister,
[Amit Varma]: that Pragya Singh Thakur is an MP, that Modi won such a big election just now, is a testament of
[Amit Varma]: the failure of the top down approach, you can't impose liberal values, you have to
[Amit Varma]: seed them into the culture. And that is a task at which liberals in India have failed utterly,
[Amit Varma]: however one defines the word liberals.
[Guest]: Well, it depends, right? I mean, if you look around the region, I still think that
[Guest]: in some ways, India has been more successful than any other country in the region.
[Guest]: I think that the Indian elites, I think the collision of the Indian elites with Western
[Guest]: ideas, you know, the whole Macaulay project, it's run much deeper in India than, for example,
[Guest]: in Pakistan, certainly. And so there's no equivalent of, say, the times of India in any
[Guest]: other country in this region. So I think that there was a moment if we'd been having this
[Guest]: conversation in, say, 1974, you could have said that things are going to go turn out in a
[Guest]: different way, right? In fact, even if we'd been having this conversation in 2010, it looked like
[Guest]: the BJP would never be a serious contender for power. And that though India was not a
[Guest]: perfectly liberal society, it was certainly liberal in many ways. And in the direction
[Guest]: in which it was moving, was towards, you know, more individual rights, more freedom of speech,
[Guest]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Driven as much perhaps by globalization and technology and all of those things.
[Guest]: So that was a real moment, right? And I think in many ways, this is sort of this is where
[Guest]: what's happening here fits into what's happening in so many other parts of the world.
[Guest]: Because, you know, in that end of history moment, right, Berlin Wall falls, and then
[Guest]: you have Indian liberalization kicking off in two years later in 1991, there was a certain
[Guest]: self confidence among global elites. And that was certainly something that was reflected
[Guest]: in India, where there was, you know, one kind of narrative that was dominant. I don't think
[Guest]: it's died entirely. But obviously, you know, liberalism is severely on the back foot right
[Guest]: now.
[Amit Varma]: And to sort of, you know, go back to Hindutva, again, I had an episode with Aakar on the
[Amit Varma]: intellectual traditions that drive the RSS and the BJP and so on. And there are two ways
[Amit Varma]: to look at the BJP. Obviously, one is that it's a modernizing party, in a sense, as under
[Amit Varma]: watched by it right to be. But the other is also that it is carrying a long old tradition,
[Amit Varma]: actually not very old, but I mean, old in the sense of, you know, maybe 100 years old,
[Amit Varma]: but not old in a deeper civilizational sense. But it's carrying that tradition forward.
[Amit Varma]: And this is sort of what it all comes down to. So now, you know, for example, you work
[Amit Varma]: in a think tank, which is considered a conservative think tank. And you've obviously thought about
[Amit Varma]: conservatism a fair deal. And I'd argue there's no analog of Burkean conservatism per se in
[Amit Varma]: India. But the BJP does represent a certain kind of conservatism. And to you, what are
[Amit Varma]: the intellectual traditions really driving the BJP? Are there any coherent traditions?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it just driven by bigotry and the sense of the other?
[Guest]: I mean, I guess in some ways you could, I mean, I haven't really pondered this, but
[Guest]: you could argue that the traditionalist view that was reflected in some of the Johnson's
[Guest]: thought, for example, don't move too fast to amend Hindu personal laws. I mean, you
[Guest]: could argue in a sense that that's Burkean, don't go too fast, you know, let these things
[Guest]: are organic, let them proceed at their own pace, and so on. But I think your larger point
[Guest]: is true, because the the BJP is fundamentally revolutionary. And they're not interested
[Guest]: in conserving in the in the Burkean sense, as much as they are in appending what they
[Guest]: think has gone, what has gone wrong in this, in this society. Now, again, you can sort
[Guest]: of go back to, you know, Savarkar and Golwalkar and Dindayal Upadhyay, right? And he gave those
[Guest]: four famous lectures on integral humanism and, and see this quest to, you know, reimagine
[Guest]: the world through this pious Hindu lens. And, you know, in some ways, I think, you know,
[Guest]: the closest analog, because I've spent some time traveling with and talking to and reading
[Guest]: about Islamists is, you know, that's where the parallels are very interesting, right?
[Guest]: There was this need for a mythical golden age, you sort of have to root your present
[Guest]: in the idea of past greatness, right? And for the Islamists, this is the era of the
[Guest]: first four caliphs. And for the Hindutva guys, it's ancient pre Islamic India. So there's
[Guest]: that commonality, there's the idea that your faith is better than everybody else's, right?
[Guest]: So if you ever point out, for instance, that secularism is under threat, immediately 100
[Guest]: people on Twitter will tell you it is not possible, because we are just innately tolerant,
[Guest]: we have the best, most innately tolerant faith imaginable. And if you don't agree, we'll
[Guest]: troll you. So you get that. And again, it's very similar to sort of, you know, how Islamists
[Guest]: view sort of the faith is kind of this, you know, Judaism and Christianity are just like,
[Guest]: we're trying stuff out. And then he finally got it right with Islam. So there is that
[Guest]: the difference lies, I think, and it's an important difference, in that the Islamists
[Guest]: are much more programmatic. And part of this is because they have relatively recent history
[Guest]: to fall back on, in terms of how society in the state was organized, right? The caliphate
[Guest]: was only abolished in 1924. So they can sort of go back and think, you know, and say that,
[Guest]: well, look, this is how we used to do things, not that long ago. And so what they have is
[Guest]: much more prescriptive in terms of policy. So when I was in Indonesia, and I was traveling
[Guest]: with Islamists, you know, you could ask them all kinds of questions, right? What should
[Guest]: the currency look like? And they said, well, you know, we should have the gold dinar and
[Guest]: the silver dirham. If we did that, then the price of the chicken today would be the same
[Guest]: as it was 1000 years ago. And what should movie theaters look like? Well, there shouldn't
[Guest]: be movie theaters, but there's some ones who wanted movie theaters. Well, okay, the women
[Guest]: should sit in one place, and the men should sit in one place. What should a banking system
[Guest]: look like? Well, there should be no interest rate. So they have a lot of this stuff that's
[Guest]: worked out. Whereas with the Hindutva folks, in some ways, you could argue it makes them
[Guest]: more benign, because they don't really have much of a program. They might get there, but
[Guest]: they don't have that. They haven't sort of thought about these things in the same way.
[Guest]: But in other ways, it's scary, because what they do have these sort of inchoate sense
[Guest]: of resentments. And you can't really beyond a point have a rational conversation with
[Guest]: many of them, because at some level, their conception of time is a pre modern conception
[Guest]: of time. And I'm always struck by this in, you know, TV studio debate with a BJP guy,
[Guest]: and he'd be talking about something that happened in, you know, 1525, as though it happened
[Guest]: last Tuesday, right? There's no capacity to sort of say that, well, you know, this just
[Guest]: this happened to me on my way to the studio. And this is something that happened 500 years
[Guest]: ago. And we don't normally, these things don't exist on the same plane in our minds. But
[Guest]: for these guys, for many of them, they do. So it's very difficult to, you know, to have
[Guest]: a fair, rational, reasoned conversation, when someone first of all, their starting point
[Guest]: is that they must settle the scores of history. Right? I can have a conversation, we can have
[Guest]: a disagreement, and I can sort of you and I can come to a compromise. But if I've decided
[Guest]: that you are responsible for something your ancestors may or may not have done 500 years
[Guest]: ago, what can you do? What can you do to satisfy me? That is one problem. And then the other
[Guest]: problem, which is again, quite similar to the Islamists is just the inability to speak
[Guest]: rationally or reasonably about certain kinds of things. So I was on an NDTV debate last
[Guest]: week. And one of these guys, sort of BJP oriented guys started talking about Hindu terror and
[Guest]: how this was this horrible thing. And how can you talk about Hindu terror and you're
[Guest]: defaming a billion people. And to me, that was just like, it's a completely absurd argument,
[Guest]: right? Now, if I describe somebody as an Italian mafia don, it doesn't mean that all Italians
[Guest]: are mafia dons. I've just said that this person is an Italian mafia don. And you can be a
[Unknown]: terrorist from any group, you can be a Tamil terrorist, you can be a Basque terrorist,
[Unknown]: you can be a Mormon terrorist. Is it true you can be an Islamic terrorist? Is it true
[Unknown]: that there are relatively few Hindu terrorists? Yes, I'll grant you that. Like very relatively
[Guest]: few cases where people inspired by the faith or their sense of defending the faith have
[Guest]: gone out and murdered or attempted to murder random civilians. Fair enough. But you can't
[Guest]: say that this is simply not possible because you have some kind of mathematical equation
[Guest]: in your head that says that a Hindu can never be a terrorist. And I feel that on these kinds
[Guest]: of questions, the space to even speak, I mean, this is not rocket science, right? This is
[Guest]: something so it's basic, it's commonsensical. It's just how you use language. But I've had
[Guest]: these conversations with people who are, who I regard as intelligent people, and who you
[Guest]: could have a reasonable conversation with about many, many other topics. But when it
[Guest]: comes to this, they're not able to discuss it rationally. And so I think that's another
[Guest]: sort of, you know, it's a similarity, right? Because you can't have a reasonable conversation
[Guest]: about the blasphemy law in Pakistan. You know, this is and I fear that we are, you know,
[Guest]: increasingly in similar territory on some of these things, because if you mention something,
[Guest]: it'll immediately be bent out of shape, it'll be distorted. And they essentially the way
[Guest]: they operate is that then they said a mob on you to sort of claim that you said something
[Guest]: that you didn't say. And it's an effective strategy. I mean, unfortunately, right. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, one question I've asked others, such as our car and that I wonder about is
[Amit Varma]: that, where do these resentments, this anger, this bitterness, where do they all come from?
[Amit Varma]: Because if you actually look at Hindus in India, they're far better off than Muslims.
[Amit Varma]: In your everyday life, you're not being victimized by them or dominated by them or so on. You
[Amit Varma]: know, even Hitler, you know, the resentment that he had against the Jews could be explained
[Amit Varma]: because the Jews were dominant in terms of finance or whatever. And you, you know, but
[Amit Varma]: Muslims are literally the downtrodden of India, they're far poorer in general than Hindus
[Amit Varma]: are definitely far worse off. Why are these resentments so widespread, that so many common
[Amit Varma]: people feel resentful towards the other, so to say,
[Guest]: a couple of reasons. First of all, I think once you start feeling like a victim, then
[Guest]: you can always look for signs of your own victimhood. I agree with you that this sort
[Guest]: of doesn't measure up to the facts. But when I talk to people who do believe this, here
[Guest]: are the kinds of things that they say. They would look, first of all, the important history
[Guest]: is very, very important, right? So someone like Rajiv Malhotra would say that, look,
[Guest]: 1000 years ago, before the advent of Islam and the subcontinent, there were Indonesia
[Guest]: was a Hindu, Java was a Hindu island, Sumatra was Hindu, Hinduism sort of stretched across
[Guest]: Afghanistan, was Buddhist and so on. And then the physical space for Indic religions has
[Guest]: been shrinking because it's been under assault from Abrahamic religions, primarily Islam.
[Guest]: Then they would look, for example, at something like Kashmir and, you know, terrible tragedy
[Guest]: of the Kashmiri pundits driven out and that would sort of be another, another data point.
[Guest]: Then they would look obviously at partition and the bloodshed of partition, the ethnic
[Guest]: cleansing that accompanied partition and again, sort of see that, look, the Hindus were at
[Guest]: the receiving end of this. And then they look at provisions in the constitution and they
[Guest]: look at the idea of minority rights, the way it was framed in India, not as protections,
[Guest]: which was the idea, but as special rights. And there's a certain element of truth to
[Guest]: that, right. So you know, I think one of the telling examples, I think this is where the
[Guest]: sort of the Hindutva approach to some of these issues deviates from the classical liberal
[Guest]: approach is the RTE. And the RTE is, you know, as you've written and others have written
[Guest]: it, it's a, it's a terrible piece of legislation. It's the worst of Indian statism. It's intrusive
[Guest]: and it's placing all these rules and restrictions and it's, you know, focused more on inputs
[Guest]: and on outcomes. Now, you and I, when we look at RTE, the way we think about it is that,
[Guest]: well, get the state out of this. And so we should liberate. So obviously, you know, religious
[Guest]: schools like Christian and Muslim schools are not, are exempt, they're minority exemptions.
[Guest]: And so our way of looking at that would be, well, let's exempt everybody. Everyone can
[Guest]: be equal and everybody can be, you take the hand of government off. The way they see the
[Guest]: same thing, they see the differential. But what they want is for everybody to be controlled.
[Guest]: Can we get the government to regulate their schools too? So it's not as though they don't
[Guest]: have a story. But what you need to do is then make the leap into this idea of constant persecution,
[Guest]: which, which simply doesn't exist. There is no persecution, right? I mean, I blame the
[Guest]: liberals for some of their missteps. I blame, you know, Manmohan Singh for making that,
[Guest]: you know, statement about, you know, Muslims have the first right of resources. That was
[Guest]: not something that a leader of a secular state should say. He should really have said everybody
[Guest]: has equal resources. But the fact is that in the end, the people who really got the
[Guest]: short end of the stick over there were Indian Muslims. It's not as though he actually went
[Guest]: and, you know, actually got the first dibs on resources. He just said something stupid.
[Guest]: That stupid thing that he said fed resentment. Muslims never had anything to do with that.
[Guest]: He said it. And, but these, I think in many ways, the sort of traditional left of center
[Guest]: Indian parties have, they've played some of this stuff really badly. And I think that
[Guest]: from the 80s onwards, they've really misunderstood the nature of Islamism, the changing patterns
[Guest]: in the world and so on. And what that allowed the Sangh Parivar to do was to couch many
[Guest]: of their arguments in, you know, classical liberal terms or in terms of, in terms of
[Guest]: just fairness. For example, I agree that there should be a uniform civil code. I agree that
[Guest]: the Indian taxpayer should not subsidize the Hajj subsidy. But the difference is that when
[Guest]: the Hajj subsidy was abolished, I was, you know, I was, I was happy. And then I made
[Guest]: the point on Twitter that you should also abolish this Mansarovar subsidy, right? It's
[Guest]: exactly the same principle. Why should the state be paying for someone's pilgrimage?
[Guest]: You could do your pilgrimage on your own money. Why should the taxpayer pay? And it doesn't
[Guest]: matter whether you're Muslim, Hindu, Christian. The problem is that when you, so they're very
[Guest]: happy many of them to go along with the universalist argument when it comes to a so called a privilege
[Guest]: or a benefit or something being given to a religious minority. But when you still turn
[Guest]: around and say, look, I want to apply the same thing to you, then they have these, you
[Guest]: know, historical reasons. And they'll say, well, you know, we've had a rough time for
[Guest]: so long, we need this for some time, right? So there's no good faith here, right? They're
[Guest]: not really interested in being fair. They're interested in presenting an argument for fairness,
[Guest]: because it allows them to gain ground.
[Amit Varma]: We'll take a quick break now. And we'll come back and talk about the 2019 elections, which
[Amit Varma]: is what we were supposed to sit down and talk about anyway.
[Unknown]: Hi, everybody, welcome to another incredible week on the IBM podcast network. If you are
[Unknown]: not following us on social media, please make sure you do. We're IBM podcast on Twitter,
[Unknown]: Facebook and Instagram. A couple of messages up top. First, we're hiring right now. We're
[Unknown]: looking to hire a producer, we're looking to hire copywriters, we're looking to hire
[Unknown]: an audio engineer, we're looking for web developers, we're looking for business people. If you're
[Unknown]: looking to work at IBM, which in my opinion, is probably one of the best places to work
[Unknown]: at then please do send us an application. Also, please do download our app if you're
[Unknown]: not listening to it on our app. Our app is available on the Play Store. And I also want
[Unknown]: to thank our sponsors this month, Savari, Storytel and Paytm Money. Thank you very much
[Unknown]: for supporting us.
[Unknown]: On Cyrus Says, Cyrus is joined by Mayank Shekhar, film critic and editorial head of Midday Entertainment.
[Unknown]: They talk about their memories from St. Xavier's prom nights, Mayank's very first encounter
[Unknown]: with Cyrus, the recently concluded elections and Mayank's process of writing. On the Filter
[Unknown]: Coffee podcast, Rani Spruwalla joins Karthik Nagarajan to talk about his early days as
[Unknown]: an entrepreneur and what has kept him going during adversities. And if that's not enough
[Unknown]: Rani Spruwalla for you, listen to his podcast, the Rani Spruwalla podcast, where Rani talks
[Unknown]: to me about the benefits and disadvantages of being an outsider, building a brand identity
[Unknown]: and the learnings from collaborating with business giants across the world. On Business.next,
[Unknown]: Govindraj Yathiraj is joined by author Jason Jennings. They talk about the key ingredients
[Unknown]: that are crucial in building a high-speed economy. On Geekfruit, Tejas Alika and special
[Unknown]: guest Ishan Krishna of Mayanak Mauth go down nostalgia lane and discuss the world of Pokemon,
[Unknown]: including the newly released Pokemon Detective Pikachu. On Simplified, Chuck Narain and Shriketh
[Unknown]: discuss the origins of the Yeti, Loch Ness Monsters, Bigfoot, and other cryptic creatures.
[Unknown]: On States of Anarchy, Hunsunee's guest is Benjamin Katz's Silverstein. He's from the
[Unknown]: Foreign Policy Research Institute and he busts myths about the Democratic People's Republic
[Unknown]: of Korea. And with that, let's get you on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Sadanand Thume about the impact
[Amit Varma]: of the 2019 elections and what exactly happened. At least we're supposed to talk about that,
[Amit Varma]: but we spent an hour just contextualizing that discussion, talking about Modi and the
[Amit Varma]: BJP and Hindutva and those intellectual traditions that brought us here and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: At what point did you realize, I mean, I've seen tweets by you after your travels through
[Amit Varma]: UP and so on, where you said that, look, now I'm convinced having been to these places
[Amit Varma]: that the BJP is going to win. At what point did you get convinced of that and why?
[Guest]: In April, I went to early April, I traveled in Western UP. Actually, I was in I was going
[Guest]: to Kathmandu for something. And I managed to sort of just steal a few days in Delhi
[Guest]: and Western UP. And I was just sort of in mini poll mode where all I did, I mean, literally,
[Guest]: if I met somebody didn't matter, Uber driver, room service guy, bellboy, paanwala, random
[Guest]: woman in a wine bar, I mean, you name it. If I met you, probably the most irritating
[Guest]: person in the city, I would like pinhole you and ask you what what you thought and what
[Amit Varma]: random woman in a wine bar in UP. No, not in UP, that was in Delhi. So that was in Delhi.
[Guest]: And then I went to travel in Western UP. And in the Jat belt, and you know, Baghpat, Shamli
[Guest]: and some of these other places. And again, just, you know, talk to as many people as
[Guest]: I could. And a couple of things emerged. And to me, the single most important, you know,
[Guest]: you started out this podcast by talking about the various explanations, but there was one
[Guest]: to me that was actually stood out above all of those. And it was simply the fact that
[Guest]: virtually everybody I spoke with, thought of Modi as a good guy. That's what it was
[Guest]: just a character thing. It was, you know, what, he's a hardworking person. He doesn't
[Guest]: have family. He puts in all this effort every day for the country. And he deserves another
[Guest]: chance. And more than anything else, that to me is was my dominant takeaway. And so
[Guest]: at that point, I came I and and because you know, because of the nature of Delhi, you
[Guest]: meet a lot of people who are migrants. So you know, I was talking to people from Rajasthan
[Guest]: from Madhya Pradesh from UP in Delhi, apart from traveling in UP. And this wasn't even
[Guest]: close on it. Right. And so you got the stories, you got the character part. And then I got
[Guest]: stories about people who would actually receive the gas cylinder, people who had built a toilet
[Guest]: in their village, guy who is a hilarious guy who had got a mudra loan in his wife's name
[Guest]: and was really happy because he didn't think he ever had to pay it back. So there were
[Guest]: all these stories in and, you know, in some cases, it was people who themselves had benefited
[Guest]: or had been touched by some of these programs. But beyond that, there were people who just
[Guest]: even if these programs had not touched them personally, the messaging had gone through
[Guest]: and they had a feeling that this stuff is happening. And I left and you know, I wrote
[Guest]: my column in the journal after that. And by the I was fairly convinced that this is, you
[Guest]: know, this is something going on. And it you know, and not one person, not one person spoke
[Guest]: like that about Rahul Gandhi. And so that was a sign. And then again, that was reinforced
[Guest]: more when I came back in the middle of May, early May, and travel a little bit in eastern
[Guest]: UP. And that was my sense that the battle of the narratives was completely won by Modi.
[Guest]: Absolutely clearly won by Modi. And so to me, it was, you know, pretty clear. I didn't
[Guest]: think I didn't believe as did most people didn't. I didn't think he'd get the BJP would
[Guest]: get 303 seats. But I was pretty convinced he's coming back.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you know, much as Twitter elites made great fun of the interview Modi did with
[Amit Varma]: Akshay Kumar, I thought it was a masterstroke because he might have been bullshitting his
[Amit Varma]: way through it. But he came across as such a affable, nice guy, the kind of uncle you'd
[Amit Varma]: want your kids to have. And just in terms of optics, it was it was a masterstroke. This
[Amit Varma]: is you know, you spoke of the battle of narratives. And there's this interesting column by Shekhar
[Amit Varma]: Gupta, I just read today in the print, where he says that the dominant sort of conflicting
[Amit Varma]: narratives for the last 20-25 years were Mandal versus Mandir, right? Where on the one hand,
[Amit Varma]: you have all these other parties which are exploiting caste divisions and caste identities
[Amit Varma]: and you know, trying to build vote banks on the basis of that. And as a counter to that,
[Amit Varma]: you have the BJP effort of the Mandir narrative where they're trying to subsume many of those
[Amit Varma]: identities within a broad Hindu identity and, you know, making that case. And Shekhar's
[Amit Varma]: point was that now that battle is irrelevant. It's not about Mandal, it's not even about
[Amit Varma]: Mandir, it's about Modi. That and which seems to, you know, hark to exactly what you said
[Amit Varma]: now that it's a personality thing. I mean, Milan Vaishnav just wrote a piece for the
[Amit Varma]: Washington Post today, which I retweeted where Milan pointed to a survey which shows that
[Amit Varma]: the number of people who would have voted for BJP if Modi was not the man in charge
[Amit Varma]: is far less.
[Amit Varma]: 32%, I think something like that. 32% less.
[Amit Varma]: Is far, far less. And Modi made that kind of difference. And is this a similar personality
[Amit Varma]: cult to Indira Gandhi? If so, how did it come about? Is it happenstance for Modi? Or was
[Amit Varma]: it actually planned by the great strategist, Ramit Shah? You know, and how does one counter
[Guest]: it?
[Guest]: Well, I think it was happenstance. It was carefully planned and extremely well resourced.
[Guest]: The BJP is much richer than any other party in India, possibly richer than most parties
[Guest]: in the world. So they certainly had the resources and the ability to get that message across.
[Guest]: And you know, anecdotally, again, you know, it's sort of distasteful to ask people what
[Guest]: their cost is. But you know, when you're reporting in the Hindi heartland, you kind of hold your
[Guest]: nose and you you do sort of ask just because that's how the narrative is set by, by journalists.
[Guest]: And it was not uncommon at all to come across people who were from subcastes that were not
[Guest]: traditionally seen as BJP voters, who were just voting for Modi. And they just like Modi.
[Guest]: And this is like, he's a good guy. He's the person I trust. He's the he's a strong leader.
[Guest]: So in many ways, the messaging, if you look at it, the messaging has been extremely simple.
[Guest]: And so the sort of things that we make fun of, right, the sort of things that people
[Guest]: make fun of on Twitter, right, like this whole thing he did on the last day of voting, where
[Guest]: he, you know, wore that ridiculous cape and then had the guy under the sink. I mean, come
[Guest]: on, it's really funny. And so right, you could have done a whole sort of, if we had a sort
[Guest]: of more of a comic tradition on television, you could have done a whole skit on how, you
[Guest]: know, here's this sort of vain guy who has like the camera following him everywhere.
[Unknown]: And everyone made fun of it. And I think it's fine. But that's the kind of thing that actually
[Guest]: boomerangs badly. I'm not saying we shouldn't have made fun of it because hey, but boomerang
[Guest]: so badly because at one level, you have most people who are in fact, connecting with him.
[Guest]: Many of them are living vicariously through that moment. So for them, he is this deeply
[Guest]: spiritual man who is connected to the religious traditions of this land. And he is out there
[Guest]: doing something deeply meaningful. And then not only is that something that they're connecting
[Guest]: with, and they have to put up with, you know, a bunch of English speaking, faithless people,
[Guest]: atheists, God knows what, beefeaters, and you know, out there making fun of him. Right.
[Guest]: And so in fact, it's sort of it boomerangs.
[Guest]: Sankarshar Thakur actually had a piece in the Telegraph today, where he also made that
[Guest]: point and I think it's absolutely correct. And that's where Modi has been a masterful
[Guest]: communicator. He's not trying to communicate to you or me. He realizes that we are ultimately
[Guest]: irrelevant. And the only reason the Congress Party folks cared about us a little bit was
[Guest]: because they bumped into us at cocktail parties, but Modi is not going to cocktail parties.
[Guest]: So there's no danger of bumping into us. And so that's very, that's a powerful insight
[Guest]: he and Amit Shah have as politicians. And you can see how that narrative was crafted,
[Guest]: how that image was crafted of the hardworking man. And in fairness to him, there's an element
[Guest]: of truth in it. I mean, you've talked about this, the biographical element, the story
[Guest]: is incredibly powerful, right in a society that is as stratified. I mean, this is the
[Guest]: thing, right? You don't have to agree with everything he does. And you can criticize
[Guest]: him while conceding. And it's an incredibly powerful story in this kind of stratified
[Guest]: society where so much of your life trajectory is determined by the accident of birth, right?
[Guest]: You and I are having this conversation in English, because we were born into certain
[Guest]: families, it was easy for us, we didn't do anything special to learn it, right? It was
[Guest]: just the luck of the draw. And so many of our life chances end up being, you know, determined
[Guest]: by just this luck, just this chance. So in such a stratified society, for someone to
[Guest]: emerge with no advantages, he doesn't have the advantage of class, he doesn't have the
[Guest]: advantage of cost, he doesn't have the advantage of Godfathers, he just he makes it through
[Guest]: hard work, and ambition, and smarts. And it's an incredibly powerful story.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you kind of spoke about, you know, how he's good material for comedy, and so
[Amit Varma]: on and so forth. And you should check out TikTok sometime, which I'm kind of addicted
[Amit Varma]: to. Have you checked out TikTok?
[Guest]: I'm keeping away. My life has already been ruined by Twitter. I can't afford TikTok.
[Amit Varma]: It is incredibly though I'd love to see you start a TikTok channel. That would be quite
[Amit Varma]: something.
[Amit Varma]: I'd love to see some of my dance moves.
[Amit Varma]: Going back to kind of what you said earlier is, you know, for example, about people who
[Amit Varma]: about subcastes and groups, which would otherwise not have voted for him voting for him, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I mean, in 2014, what he did famously do was that he exploited intra caste resentments.
[Amit Varma]: For example, in UP, he reached out to non jatav dalits and to non yadav OBCs and so
[Amit Varma]: on and got them on his side. And he managed to expand those sort of alliances over time.
[Amit Varma]: And just today, I think I saw a tweet thread from Jignesh Mewani, the Dalit leader in Gujarat
[Amit Varma]: and who was kind of bemoaning and saying, I don't understand it that so many Dalits
[Amit Varma]: actually seem to have voted for Modi. And you know, there have been Dalit scholars in
[Amit Varma]: the past who said that, you know, the Dalit party in India today is basically the BJP,
[Amit Varma]: which seems, you know, like a masterful achievement of political strategy. And coming, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in coming to that, like there is one way where you can think that this rise of Hindutva and
[Amit Varma]: this rise of the BJP, especially given the incompetence of the opposition was inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: But another way of looking at it is to, you know, do the whole great man theory of history
[Amit Varma]: thing and say that no, Amit Shah is really the strategic genius who's made all of this
[Amit Varma]: possible. How do you sort of look at that?
[Guest]: I guess maybe a bit of both, right? I mean, for sure, you have Amit Shah's, you know,
[Guest]: ability to craft these very sort of carefully plotted alliances and look at the math of
[Guest]: these things with great granularity, then you have Modi's undeniable charisma, his powerful
[Guest]: biography. I mean, you also have the fact, frankly, that the both the Lohiite parties
[Guest]: and the Dalit parties, basically the SP and the BSP are, you know, they're a travesty.
[Guest]: I mean, Mulan Singh Yadav's son's driving around in a Lamborghini. These are not people
[Guest]: who have maintained any kind of standard of probity in public life. What are they in it
[Guest]: for? Right. And that's the question I ask. You can disagree with the BJP guys and I disagree
[Guest]: with them. But, you know, for example, as the results from Amethi were coming in and,
[Guest]: you know, it was it was getting late. There were a bunch of workers who were there as
[Guest]: Smriti Irani supporters. Right. They were in the booth. They are they're driven by something.
[Guest]: They wake up in the morning and they are energized because they believe in something. What do
[Guest]: these other parties believe in? What do they believe in beyond making their own family
[Guest]: or kinship group wealthy or powerful? Right. I mean, what was the SP rule in, you know,
[Guest]: in UP? They did some good things. They made some roads and so on. But a lot of it was
[Guest]: about empowering, you know, gundas from their community to do whatever they wanted. So I
[Guest]: think the moral center has really fallen out of these parties. And that has that that is
[Guest]: one thing that, you know, that's just made for the BJP. And so that's why you don't get
[Guest]: the kind of transference. Right. So this is the assumption of the Gatbandhan was that,
[Guest]: look, we're together. So all the Dalits are going to vote for the SP candidates and all
[Guest]: the Yadavs are going to vote for the BSP candidates. Ashok Varshney even wrote a piece in the Indian
[Guest]: Express where he sort of broke out all the math. But that's not how it works, because
[Guest]: the BJP has, for the Hindu majority, especially in the Hindi heartland, they've been able
[Guest]: to craft a kind of moral message. The tragedy of that message is that it involves a complete
[Guest]: lack of compassion or any kind of connection to things like minority rights and the things
[Amit Varma]: that we talked about.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the things that I kept remarking on as these elections came close
[Amit Varma]: was that the BJP seemed to behave as if history ended in 2014. They would not talk about the
[Amit Varma]: five years the governance records of that time would keep going back to Nehru did this
[Amit Varma]: and Rajiv Gandhi did this and so on. But the Congress on the other hand behaved as if history
[Amit Varma]: began in 2014, where they would ignore their past misgovernance over 70 years where in
[Amit Varma]: fact when Rahul Gandhi would be asked about things like bank nationalization or the horrors
[Amit Varma]: of the emergency or the horrors of 1984, which he was aware he at one point denied that his
[Amit Varma]: family had a role. And they were sort of in denial of all that in the past and basing
[Amit Varma]: everything on Modi is a bad guy, don't vote for Modi, vote for us without sort of laying
[Amit Varma]: out their own vision. And, you know, as as the elections came, they did lay out a little
[Amit Varma]: bit of their own vision. And some of it was old school welfarism of the Garibi Hatao type
[Amit Varma]: like the whole Niay campaign. And some of it was just hypocritical in the sense and
[Amit Varma]: I asked Salman about this in the episode I did with him as well, that you know, they
[Amit Varma]: had a thing in the manifesto about we'll have directly elected mayors will be actually empowered
[Amit Varma]: to do local governance, which is great, but that is a state subject, the Congress is in
[Amit Varma]: power in so many states, and they've honestly done jack about it. You know, in fact, a lot
[Amit Varma]: of what is in their manifesto for 2019 could have been implemented by state governments
[Amit Varma]: in different ways. And they've done absolutely nothing. This is just posturing to Twitter
[Amit Varma]: elites, what has gone wrong with the Congress, right, even after this heavy defeat, they
[Amit Varma]: are still sticking to failed and competent leaders.
[Guest]: I mean, we need a whole different podcast on what has gone wrong with Congress. But
[Guest]: you know, to start with, you know, in some ways, if you if you think about the big narrative
[Guest]: about India since 1947, you know, despite the fact that, you know, we've done pretty
[Guest]: well, relatively speaking, since 1991. All in all, if you step back, and you look at
[Guest]: India 1947 to 2019, I think it's fair to say that we haven't done as well as we should
[Guest]: have and that many other places have done much better. And this plays into Modi's hands,
[Guest]: because the story that Congress has to tell voters is that, look, actually, we did a pretty
[Guest]: good job. And they try to tell that story by pointing to the IIMs and ISRO and the IITs.
[Guest]: And certainly there's been progress, no question about it, right? And if you're any, if you
[Guest]: look at per capita income, literacy or anything, there's been progress. But you can't really
[Guest]: make the case that they did a fantastic job, right? The Nehru-Gandhi family did not do
[Guest]: for India, what Lee Kuan Yew did, what the Lees did for Singapore. They just didn't,
[Guest]: right? And Modi is able to wield that as a club. And so their defenses just come across
[Guest]: as weak, right? It's like, no, look, we actually helped build the whatever x institution or
[Guest]: whatever. And so that's part of the problem. The other part of the problem is that, you
[Guest]: know, Rahul Gandhi is in, he's basically European socialist, right? NIAI is a handout scheme.
[Guest]: And I believe this is truly who he is. I think he's being sincere. This is how he sees the
[Guest]: world, right? You go back, you know, go back to 10 years, and he was talking about the
[Guest]: two Indias and how he was going to fight for the tribals of Orissa and so on.
[Amit Varma]: It's complete zero sum thinking. He doesn't really have any deeper understanding of economics
[Guest]: or policy. But to the degree that he has any kind of instincts, those are his instincts.
[Guest]: The problem is that when you are a fourth or fifth or whatever, depending on how you
[Guest]: want to count a generation, dentist, you really can't play the I'm the Messiah of the poor
[Guest]: game better than the tea seller. You can't, you may think you can, but you're delusional
[Guest]: if you think you can. And this is the fundamental problem. He is not an authentic bearer of
[Guest]: the message that he wants to bear. Quite apart from the fact that he has sort of other problems.
[Guest]: He doesn't have the most basic political skills. He's an anti politician in some ways, and
[Guest]: we can get into that. But the story that the Congress could sell is the story of competence,
[Guest]: relative competence, to the extent that they might do stupid things, but they wouldn't
[Unknown]: do nutty demon, right? So it was, they would, they might, you know, screw up on interfaith
[Guest]: relations, but you wouldn't have Yogi Adityanath as chief minister of UP. So their story was
[Guest]: really of look, we are where the grownups here. And that may not have been a compelling
[Guest]: enough story because the country happens to be a large chunks of the country are in love
[Guest]: with Narendra Modi. I'm not saying that I would have won the election. But this idea
[Guest]: that this guy born with a silver spoon in his mouth, not just a silver spoon, the whole
[Guest]: cutlery set, right? This, this guy is somehow going to be the Messiah of the poor, and he's
[Guest]: going to take on the chaiwala. I mean, it's preposterous.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I'm really amused by the fact that a lot of my friends who call themselves progressives
[Amit Varma]: actually support a guy who is where he is only because he was born into extreme privilege,
[Amit Varma]: and because of power structures in his party, prevent others from actually rising up through
[Amit Varma]: the ranks. And they support this guy. And to me, it simply doesn't compute. It's classic
[Amit Varma]: hypocrisy. I mean, I've said in the past that, you know, a couple of years back, I'd said
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, those who support Gandhi today are helping Modi win in 2019. And similarly
[Amit Varma]: today, I think those who are helping Rahul Gandhi stay in power are helping Modi win
[Amit Varma]: 2024. But, you know, tell me something. I mean, it's if the Congress is a dying party
[Amit Varma]: and the Gandhis help it along, that's fine. But a healthy democracy needs an opposition.
[Amit Varma]: Where are the possible avenues and opposition can emerge from?
[Guest]: It's a tough question. And I think that that's, you know, the only argument you in fact have
[Guest]: for keeping the Congress alive at this moment in time is that without them, there'd be even
[Guest]: less of an opposition. There's no meaningful political opposition, even with the Congress
[Guest]: with their 52 seats, or whatever, and in the Lok Sabha, the media has been a large chunks
[Guest]: of the media have been co-opted. And the parts that have not been co-opted can probably be
[Guest]: safely ignored. The courts do have a measure of independence, though. But again, I think
[Guest]: a powerful executive with five years ahead of it would have enough tools to sort of slowly
[Guest]: and gradually make sure that the sort of people that they approve of are in the courts. And
[Guest]: we've already seen, for instance, in the last five years, the collapse of any kind of case
[Guest]: where the victim happens to be a minority and the accused happens to be someone associated
[Guest]: with the Sangh Parivar. So you already sort of see the courts under pressure. What does
[Guest]: that leave? Whose bureaucracy has been politicized? So I think we are in uncharted territory here.
[Guest]: We really have, we're in a place where, you know, the old argument and the old complaint
[Guest]: about India used to be that, look, things move too slowly. There's no foot on the accelerator.
[Guest]: And I think now we have to sort of start thinking of India and imagine what it's like to have
[Guest]: no brakes. And that's what's going on now. We have no brakes. There are things that have
[Guest]: happened in the last five years that we would not have been able to imagine. I would not
[Guest]: have been able to imagine that someone like Hemant Karkare, who was a national hero, loses
[Guest]: his life fighting Pakistani terrorists on 26-11 in Mumbai, can have his reputation savaged
[Guest]: and soiled overnight on social media, because the BJP has decided to nominate Sadhvi Pragya.
[Guest]: So even if people who have this sort of traditional set of protections, right, civil service,
[Guest]: yes, gallantry award, people like that, their reputations are no longer safe. So in many
[Guest]: ways, we're just in a place where, you know, virtually anything is possible. And some of
[Guest]: this stuff is probably outside the realms of our imagination.
[Amit Varma]: Sort of moving on back to, you know, leaving the opposition aside and just moving back
[Amit Varma]: to the BJP and this government. You'd mentioned earlier about the massive amount of resources
[Amit Varma]: that they have. And in fact, this is a point, say, Raghu Karnad made through an excellent
[Amit Varma]: video a while back on YouTube, and he persistently drives this point home on Twitter that the
[Amit Varma]: BJP just have so many more resources than anyone else to push their narrative. And that
[Amit Varma]: is a massive part of their victory as well. And at one hand, of course, you don't know
[Amit Varma]: which way the causation also goes. Part of the reason they have these resources is that
[Amit Varma]: the narrative is winning out. But then also it's a question of maybe network effects.
[Amit Varma]: Power attracts money, money buys more power, and so on and so forth. Is that something
[Amit Varma]: that worries you?
[Guest]: I mean, beyond that, look at the evil genius of it. They come up with these electoral bonds,
[Unknown]: which basically make funding completely opaque. And they sell it to people as a reform. I
[Unknown]: mean, it is, you've got to at one level admire it. Look, I've cleaned up electoral funding.
[Unknown]: How have you cleaned it up? I've cleaned it up by introducing these completely opaque
[Guest]: bonds, and of which 90% or 95% of them will never come to my party. In theory, you don't
[Guest]: know who gave the money, but you can be pretty darn sure that the people who are buying these
[Guest]: bonds believe that the parties know exactly who they're giving the money to. And so in
[Guest]: some ways, it's also this moment, right, where the Indian economy has grown to a certain
[Guest]: size and elections have become so expensive. And this party that is very well organized,
[Guest]: and absolutely ruthless when it comes to winning elections, has seized the reins of power.
[Guest]: And now it has this first mover advantage that gives it such a huge leg up over anybody
[Guest]: else. And, you know, it really comes back to 2014, where, you know, at one point, Congress
[Guest]: would have had those advantages, they didn't have the ruthlessness, they didn't have the
[Guest]: imagination to really press their point. You know, they were shambolic and disorganized.
[Guest]: These guys have power now. I mean, you never know in politics, of course, things, people
[Guest]: think go up and down. But given the kind of system that is being put in place, both in
[Guest]: terms of, you know, traditional media, such as television, the fake news factories that
[Guest]: are set up where, you know, basically, you know, there's just, you know, there's no difference
[Guest]: between, you know, there are people out there, you know, who genuinely believe that Nehru
[Guest]: was this lascivious man, because they've seen a picture of him pecking his niece on the
[Guest]: cheek at an airport. Right? There are people who really genuinely believe that Nehru had
[Guest]: Stalin put Bose into some gulag in Siberia, right? There are people, this stuff is believed,
[Guest]: right? I've met people in Uttar Pradesh, who, you know, tell me that, you know, Nehru's
[Guest]: great grandfather was a Muslim. I mean, this is just so what is true and what is not true.
[Guest]: They have an ability to just to dominate both traditional media, and then using, you know,
[Guest]: WhatsApp and these fake news sites that they've set up, like postcard news, also just put
[Guest]: out misinformation. And then they have the resources to amplify this. And you have this
[Guest]: completely inept opposition, you have the fact that a large section of our punditocracy
[Guest]: will very happily get co opted. I mean, the best example for me of that is all the sort
[Guest]: of self professed libertarians singing the praises of demon. I mean, it's sort of it's
[Unknown]: surreal.
[Amit Varma]: To bring libertarians into it is absolutely shocking. I'd written a piece about this called,
[Amit Varma]: you know, beware of the useful idiots talking about sort of the intellectuals who supported
[Amit Varma]: Modi, even long after it became obvious that he is what he's shown himself to be. And in
[Amit Varma]: fact, in that, I don't know if you read it, but I held you out as an example of intellectual
[Amit Varma]: honesty, because you kind of changed your mind there. But you know, just fake news.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, we live in an age of bullshit in the sense that Harry Frankford defined the term
[Amit Varma]: bullshit, right, which is that a person who lies knows what the truth is. And he chooses
[Amit Varma]: to lie to divert people's attention from that. A person who bullshit doesn't care what the
[Amit Varma]: truth is. He's just winging it. He's saying whatever he feels like at the moment, and
[Amit Varma]: it may or may not be true. And, you know, Modi is a classic bullshitter. And it works
[Amit Varma]: for him in the sense that even if you see that much maligned interview of him, where
[Amit Varma]: he speaks about how clouds sort of stop radar, right. And now the thing is, by making fun
[Amit Varma]: of him, we're just like getting him you're just you're just increasing his vote margin
[Amit Varma]: even more.
[Amit Varma]: Because number one, people don't care about the facts. And number two, what he does well
[Amit Varma]: in that interview is he comes across as this folksy likeable as this guy with folksy wisdom
[Amit Varma]: and he's, you know, likeable and all of that and that image has nothing to do with whether
[Amit Varma]: he's talking sense or not. And this is something which I think a lot of people just haven't
[Amit Varma]: figured out that we live in an age where facts don't matter.
[Guest]: And I don't think it's just bullshitting. I don't think it's a question of, well, I'm
[Guest]: talking about the larger machine, not Modi specifically. I don't think this is a question
[Guest]: of not caring. The lies in the fabrications are very carefully crafted. Again, it's the
[Guest]: same thing. It comes down to sort of like the cloud. They are preposterous to us. If
[Guest]: you're educated, you think this is like, it's actually you can't read this stuff without
[Unknown]: laughing, right? Nehru's grandfather was Ghiyasuddin Ghazi. It's insane stuff. But this stuff
[Guest]: is believed, right? So and it's all very well constructed. It all goes in a particular direction.
[Guest]: And they have at this point, they have done such a number on Rahul Gandhi. I don't think
[Guest]: his political reputation is recoverable. And it's because they didn't have the capacity
[Guest]: to take this seriously. So they're not just bullshitting, they have targets. They figure
[Guest]: out who they want to go after. I mean, at one point, it was kind of, we had the sort
[Guest]: of lower end of this, I sort of, at some one point, I found that there were all kinds of
[Guest]: people who were on Twitter who would attack me. And they will always accuse me of taking
[Guest]: either 2 lakh rupees or 5 lakh rupees from the from the Congress. Of course, they haven't
[Guest]: read the fact that I'm, I've been critical of Congress for more than 10 years and still
[Guest]: remain critical of Congress. But anyway, they were like, you're on the Congress payroll.
[Guest]: And I was kind of I couldn't understand why they only ever accused me either of taking
[Unknown]: 2 lakh rupees or 5 lakh rupees. And I was just like, why are there no 4? And it's kind
[Amit Varma]: of an insult that they're accusing you of being so cheap, like you can sell yourself
[Unknown]: for 5 lakhs. Well, 5 lakhs is a lot of money for me. I think it was a recurring thing.
[Guest]: It wasn't just wasn't a one time thing. So I was sort of like, why? Why do they only
[Guest]: have these two numbers? Why don't they have, you know, three and a half? And it turns out
[Guest]: there was in one of their fake news sites, someone had written a story where they hadn't
[Guest]: attached names on put names there. But they put out this story saying that Cambridge Analytica
[Guest]: has hired, I don't know, 125 intellectuals to defame Modiji. And my hunch is that there
[Guest]: was another version of this, which is probably on WhatsApp, where they had sort of lists
[Unknown]: of people. And people believe this stuff, right? I mean, this is just someone just writing
[Guest]: a column somewhere, and they care enough to do this. Imagine if you're actually a real
[Unknown]: opponent. This is terrifying, right? Look at Nitish Kumar. You're doing yourself a disservice.
[Guest]: You're a real opponent. He was just, you know, one day he was being battered every day on
[Guest]: television as for corruption, and his whole image was Mr. Clean. And then suddenly he's,
[Guest]: you know, he switches and then those stories go away. So you know, the comparison I've
[Guest]: been making more recently, I mean, the obvious comparison, of course, is with Erdogan because
[Guest]: of the roots and religious nationalism support from the business class, the distance from
[Guest]: secular elites and all of that. But another really good example, parallel is with Orban
[Guest]: in Hungary. And what you have is when Modi talks about the car market consensus, and
[Guest]: he talks about going against it, what he's basically doing is that he is pitching his own sense
[Guest]: of Hindu authenticity against this supercilious, sneering, globalized elite. And it works.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a framing that's actually common to all populists. Like I'd written a column
[Amit Varma]: about it a couple of years ago based on Jan-Werner Muller's book on populism, where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: blaming the elites is one of I think there's a whole laundry list of things that populists
[Amit Varma]: have in common, whether it's Erdogan, or Modi, or Duterte, or whoever, or Orban. And one
[Amit Varma]: of them, of course, is blaming elites. And you can't say that our elites haven't made
[Guest]: that job easy for them, of course.
[Guest]: Absolutely. I mean, it only works because there's a kernel of truth there. Right? People
[Guest]: are supercilious people are I mean, I'll give you one example, right? The whole, let's say,
[Guest]: if you are a religious Hindu, you're the entire conversation about the Ram temple outside
[Guest]: of popular politics, if you look at it, the sort of newspapers, the if you look at the
[Guest]: TV studios, and so on, the entire debate was dominated by people who just mostly just just
[Guest]: are not very religious. They're just not they're not connected. They don't have a dog in this
[Guest]: fight. And I think that this sort of thing, it breeds this tremendous sense of, of resentment,
[Guest]: of being, you know, and I think that the lot of the BJP people, they, that's what they
[Guest]: crave, they crave respect, what they don't understand is that you have to earn respect.
[Guest]: And they think that they can, the only way to get that respect for them is to point to
[Guest]: vote totals and say, look, now, I mean, again, it's totally illogical, right? I mean, you
[Guest]: can get 303 seats in the Lok Sabha that but, you know, demonetization is still too crazy
[Guest]: for Venezuela, I'm sorry. But that's not how they see it.
[Amit Varma]: And it's something even Modi and peak bullshitting mode doesn't mention anymore, because it's
[Amit Varma]: this kind of, that's not even a case to be made. You know, speaking about the BJP, if
[Amit Varma]: we kind of look back through history and trying to figure out where they may go from here.
[Amit Varma]: And one thread that I've kind of found in political Hindutva from the Jan Sangh onwards,
[Amit Varma]: is that every leader has been made to look moderate by those who followed him. For example,
[Amit Varma]: Vajpayee, you could argue, made Shyama Prasad Mukherjee look moderate. Advani made Vajpayee
[Amit Varma]: look like a statesman. Modi made Advani look acceptable. And then came Adityanath and perhaps
[Amit Varma]: now even Pragya. And do you therefore see the BJP getting more extreme, especially now,
[Amit Varma]: with this consolidated hold on power, and the questions that are coming from certain
[Amit Varma]: sources, which you know, I mean, I've heard people asking, ki mandir kaha hai? You know,
[Amit Varma]: people arguing that Modi is too moderate, Adityanath is too moderate, we voted you to
[Amit Varma]: power, mandir kaha hai? What do you think of the future direction of the BJP? Are there
[Amit Varma]: competing forces pulling them in different directions? Or is this inevitable?
[Guest]: So I think you could certainly make that argument for a progression the way you've made it.
[Guest]: But I view it slightly differently. I think that there are always choices. And I think
[Guest]: that the BJP in the Vajpayee era was in many ways grappling with those choices. You can
[Guest]: fault Vajpayee for, you know, in the end, not sort of not doing everything that he could
[Guest]: have done. But you know, there were certainly, you know, if you look at the kinds of people
[Guest]: he surrounded himself with, people like Brijesh Mishra, people like Jaswant Singh, people
[Guest]: like Arun Shourie. These are, you know, broadly people who were, you know, who wanted economic
[Guest]: liberalization and had, you know, broadly liberal views on, you know, questions of faith
[Guest]: and identity politics. And again, you know, as a conservative, it's not as though there
[Guest]: are no problems there, right? There are problems on the sort of, there are problems that the
[Guest]: liberal left in India has preferred not to look at, right? I once wrote a column in the
[Guest]: Wall Street Journal about how this extremist Wahhabi cleric Zakir Naik was being hailed
[Guest]: as a liberal by Indian liberals, which is preposterous. So I think there was a moment
[Guest]: where the BJP could have turned towards a more moderate path. And that moment was not
[Guest]: seized. Going ahead now, I have to say it's hard to be optimistic. You know, I've been
[Guest]: in Delhi the last few days, talking to people and they point to the Gujarat experience.
[Guest]: And they say that look, just as Modi as chief minister of Gujarat, when his his second and
[Guest]: third terms, he kind of clamped down on the hotheads and so on, and that he's going to
[Guest]: do that again. The way I see it, though, is that, you know, once you have unleashed these
[Guest]: forces, and again, I go back to the Adityanath model, it's just, it's very difficult to put
[Guest]: this genie back in the bottle. Now that they control the narrative, now that they have,
[Guest]: you know, some of these sort of completely outlandish things, right? I mean, look at
[Guest]: the, you know, if the, there's a point I made in one of my Times of India columns that right,
[Unknown]: if the World Bank had an ease of doing bigotry index, India would be like, fastest moving
[Guest]: country on that, right. So we went from being in the space of a few short years, we went
[Guest]: from being a country where you could not even discuss things like Islamism and terrorism,
[Guest]: right, the taboo topics, you couldn't even go there. And now we've reached a point where
[Guest]: people on national television are propounding just like absolutely, you know, batshit crazy
[Guest]: theories and ideas. I was on a channel the other day, on counting day, I won't take his
[Guest]: name there. But we were having this discussion and Sabah Naqvi made the point, a perfectly
[Guest]: legitimate point, that the kind of margins that people like Pragya Singh Thakur or Giriraj
[Guest]: Singh Sakshi Maharaj had got, would suggest that this 2019 vote, in some ways is a vote
[Guest]: for majoritarianism. It's a perfectly legitimate point, you can contest it, you can say it's
[Guest]: also a vote for other things, but there's nothing wrong with saying what she said. And
[Guest]: immediately you had other panellists, you know, attacking her in the most base terms
[Guest]: and accusing her basically, because she's someone who happens to be Muslim, of launching
[Guest]: a Ghazwa-e-Hind to subjugate and wipe out the Hindus. This is like, this is again, you
[Guest]: know, some of it again, I mean, it's so crazy that it's funny. But it sort of tells you
[Guest]: what has happened to the discourse. And because this has happened to the discourse, I see
[Guest]: no will to discipline this, right? I don't see, what they want to do is image management.
[Guest]: They're not actually willing to do something. And the best example of this is that, you
[Guest]: know, the Prime Minister after Pragya Singh Thakur says that Nathuram Godse was a patriot.
[Guest]: He says that, oh, well, I'll never forgive her. But if this is such a big deal for you,
[Guest]: why don't you dismiss her? Right? So that's the point, right? There's image management,
[Guest]: and then there's actual principle. And we've seen no evidence that actual principle is
[Guest]: actually out there to trump image management.
[Amit Varma]: I want to ask you one last question before we sort of end this episode, which is, okay,
[Amit Varma]: now that Modi has got this resounding mandate, and now that we are where we are, looking
[Amit Varma]: ahead to the next five years or the next 10 years, what gives you hope and what gives
[Guest]: you despair?
[Guest]: What gives me hope is that, you know, for all the problems, India's democracy has deepened.
[Guest]: And that there is a possibility that India could just, in its own messy way, stumbled
[Guest]: upon the right set of policies, learn from trial and error, at least there's a there's
[Guest]: going to be a certain amount of political stability. And so he may be able to get the
[Guest]: economic reform story right in the second term, but she wasn't able to be doing the
[Guest]: first term. I'm not saying that will happen. But if I want to be hopeful, I'll talk about
[Guest]: that. And I would also hope that the sort of natural fact that this is a deeply pluralistic
[Guest]: society is going to prevail, and that people recognize that this is just not only morally
[Guest]: reprehensible, but also insane, to try to sort of take 20% of your population and make
[Guest]: them somehow feel as though they're not fully part of your country. So that would be the
[Guest]: sort of optimistic side of things. On the pessimistic side, I think that there are quite
[Guest]: possibly, you know, playing with things that have long term implications that they have
[Guest]: not really figured out, right? I mean, these are really serious debates. Just the other
[Guest]: day, I was reading a series of essays that Lala Lajpat Rai wrote almost exactly 100 years
[Guest]: ago in 1924. Gandhi had just arrived on the scene. There had been riots between Hindus
[Guest]: and Muslims in various parts of British India. And he was really trying to work through some
[Guest]: of these issues, right? How do you work together as Hindus and Muslims and get the British
[Guest]: out but also maintain some kind of good relations and so on. And one of the things that struck
[Guest]: me was that we really no longer have people in the political class, with a few exceptions,
[Guest]: right? There are people like Shashi Tharoor, even Jay Panda, who sort of read and are engaged
[Guest]: with ideas. But by and large, the decline of the quality of our political class, right?
[Guest]: Look at what was thrown up in the last 40 years of British rule. And look at what we've
[Guest]: thrown up in the 70 years of our, of independence. The decline in quality has just been, it's
[Guest]: staggering, right? I mean, you go from Ambedkar to Mayawati, if you just look at it in terms
[Guest]: of intellectual content, for instance. So I worry that we now have, we're headed into
[Guest]: an era where India is going to continue to face extremely large and complex problems.
[Guest]: And we have a political class that may not be equipped to deal with those problems.
[Amit Varma]: On that truly dark and depressing note, thanks so much for coming on the show, Sadanand.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks for having me.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, you can follow Sadanand on Twitter at Dhume,
[Amit Varma]: D-H-U-M-E. An archive of his writings is also linked from the show notes on the episode
[Amit Varma]: page. You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, that's A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse
[Amit Varma]: past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in, thinkpragati.com and ivnpodcast.com.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution, an independent center
[Amit Varma]: for research in education and public policy. The Takshashila Institution offers 12 weeks
[Amit Varma]: courses in public policy, technology policy, and strategic studies and for both full time
[Amit Varma]: students and working professionals. Visit takshashila.org.in for more details. Thank
[Amit Varma]: you for listening.
[Unknown]: I'll see you next time.
[Unknown]: Take care.